INTRODUCTION

Merit is sham. 
An entire civilization resists this conclusion. 
Every decent person agrees that advantage should be earned through ability and effort rather than inherited alongside caste. 
The meritocratic ideal - that social and economic rewards should track achievement rather than breeding - anchors the self-image of the age. 
Aristocracy has had its day, and meritocracy is now a basic tenet of civil religion in all advanced societies. 

Meritocracy promises to promote equality and opportunity by opening a previously hereditary elite to outsiders, armed with nothing save their own talents and ambitions. 
It further promises to harmonize private advantage and public interest, by insisting that wealth and status must be earned through accomplishment. 
Together, these ideals aspire to unite all of society behind a shared vision of hard work, skill, and deserved reward. 
But meritocracy no longer operates as promised. 
Today, middle-class children lose out to rich children at school, and middle-class adults lose out to elite graduates at work. 
Meritocracy blocks the middle class from opportunity. 
Then it blames those who lose a competition for income and status that, even when everyone plays by the rules, only the rich can win. 

Meritocracy harms the elite as well.
Meritocratic schooling requires rich parents to invest thousands of hours and millions of dollars to get elite ducations for their children. 
And meritocratic jobs reqire elite adults to work with grinding intensity, ruthlessly exploiting their educations in order to extract a return from these investments. 
Meritocracy entices an anxious and inauthentic elite into a pitiless, lifelong contest to secure income and status through its own excessive industry. 

Finally, meritocracy now divides the elite from the middle class. 
It drives the middle class to resent the establishment and seduces the elite to cling to the corrupt prerogatives of caste. 
Meritocracy ensnares the society that both classes must share in a maelstrom of recrimination, disrespect, and dysfunction. 

Meritocracy's charisma disguises all these harms, making it difficult to accept - indeed, seriously to consider - that meritocracy itself lies behind them. 
Even the angriest critics of the age embrace the meritocratic ideal. 
They charge that corrupt elites only pretend to reward achievement but actually favor their own. 
By indicting individual bad actors for failing to honor a meritocratic ideal in practice, they reaffirm meritocracy in principle. 

But in fact, social and economic structures, rather than personal vices, cause the disaffection and discord that increasingly overwhelm American life. 
Whatever its original purposes and early triumphs, meritocracy now concentrates advantage and sustains toxic inequalities. 
And the taproot of all these troubles is not too little but rather too much meritocracy. 
Merit itself has become a counterfeit virtue, a false idol. 
And meritocracy - formerly benevolent and just - has become what it was invented to combat. 
A mechanism for the concentration and dynastic fransmission of wealth and privilege across generations. 
A caste order that breeds rancor and division. 
A new aristocracy, even. 